Documentation/mainboard/hp/z220_sff.md, before:

# HP Z220 SFF Workstation

This page describes how to run coreboot on the [HP Z220 SFF Workstation] desktop
from [HP].

## TODO

The following things are still missing from this coreboot port:

- Extended HWM reporting
- Advanced LED control
- Advanced power configuration in S3

## Flashing coreboot

```eval_rst
+---------------------+-------------+
| Type                | Value       |
+=====================+=============+
| Socketed flash      | no          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Model               | N25Q128..3E |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Size                | 16 MiB      |
+---------------------+-------------+
| In circuit flashing | yes         |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Package             | SOIC-16     |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Write protection    | No          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Dual BIOS feature   | No          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Internal flashing   | yes         |
+---------------------+-------------+
```

### Internal programming

The SPI flash can be accessed using [flashrom].

### External programming

External programming with an SPI adapter and [flashrom] does work, but it powers the
whole southbridge complex. You need to supply enough current through the programming adapter.

If you want to use a SOIC pomona test clip, you have to cut the 2nd DRAM DIMM holder,
as otherwise there's not enough space near the flash.

## Technology

```eval_rst
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Northbridge      | :doc:`../../northbridge/intel/sandybridge/index` |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Southbridge      | bd82x6x                                          |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| CPU              | model_206ax                                      |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| SuperIO          | :doc:`../../superio/nuvoton/npcd378`             |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| EC               |                                                  |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Coprocessor      | Intel ME                                         |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
```

[HP Z220 SFF Workstation]: https://support.hp.com/za-en/document/c03386950
[HP]: https://www.hp.com/
[flashrom]: https://flashrom.org/Flashrom

Commit message:

mb/hp/z220_series: Improve the port for z220_sff_workstation
- Move configs for PCIe ports not present on z220_sff_workstation
  from the devicetree.cb of base board to the overridetree.cb of
  z220_cmt_workstation.

- Add a note for ME/AMT Flash Override jumper, for it is hard to
  flash from OEM firmware either internally or externally without
  closing this jumper.

- Add a side note for similar HP Compaq Elite 8300 SFF.

Signed-off-by: Bill XIE <persmule@hardenedlinux.org>
Change-Id: I35d8b97f52a83910a61c12b1f7367ee7a19a9ad7
Reviewed-on: https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/65703
Reviewed-by: Arthur Heymans <arthur@aheymans.xyz>
Reviewed-by: Paul Menzel <paulepanter@mailbox.org>
Tested-by: build bot (Jenkins) <no-reply@coreboot.org>

Documentation/mainboard/hp/z220_sff.md, after:

# HP Z220 SFF Workstation

This page describes how to run coreboot on the [HP Z220 SFF Workstation] desktop
from [HP].

## TODO

The following things are still missing from this coreboot port:

- Extended HWM reporting
- Advanced LED control
- Advanced power configuration in S3

## Flashing coreboot

```eval_rst
+---------------------+-------------+
| Type                | Value       |
+=====================+=============+
| Socketed flash      | no          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Model               | N25Q128..3E |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Size                | 16 MiB      |
+---------------------+-------------+
| In circuit flashing | yes         |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Package             | SOIC-16     |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Write protection    | No          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Dual BIOS feature   | No          |
+---------------------+-------------+
| Internal flashing   | yes         |
+---------------------+-------------+
```

### Internal programming

The SPI flash can be accessed using [flashrom].

### External programming

External programming with an SPI adapter and [flashrom] does work, but it powers the
whole southbridge complex. You need to supply enough current through the programming adapter.

If you want to use a SOIC pomona test clip, you have to cut the 2nd DRAM DIMM holder, as
otherwise there's not enough space near the flash.

In both case, if ME has not been completely disabled, ME/AMT Flash Override jumper had better
be temporary closed for flashing to disable the locking of regions, and prevent ME to run and
interfere.

## Side note
The mainboard of [HP Compaq Elite 8300 SFF] is very similar to the one of Z220 SFF, except
that Compaq Elite 8300 uses Q77 instead of C216 for its PCH, and their boot firmwares are
even interchangeable, so should do coreboot images built for them.

## Technology

```eval_rst
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Northbridge      | :doc:`../../northbridge/intel/sandybridge/index` |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Southbridge      | bd82x6x                                          |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| CPU              | model_206ax                                      |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| SuperIO          | :doc:`../../superio/nuvoton/npcd378`             |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| EC               |                                                  |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
| Coprocessor      | Intel ME                                         |
+------------------+--------------------------------------------------+
```

[HP Z220 SFF Workstation]: https://support.hp.com/za-en/document/c03386950
[HP Compaq Elite 8300 SFF]: https://support.hp.com/us-en/document/c03345460
[HP]: https://www.hp.com/
[flashrom]: https://flashrom.org/Flashrom
