Documentation/mainboard/ocp/deltalake.md, before:

# OCP Delta Lake

This page describes coreboot support status for the [OCP] (Open Compute Project)
Delta Lake server platform. This page is updated following each 4-weeks
build/test/release cycle.

## Introduction

OCP Delta Lake server platform is a component of multi-host server system
Yosemite-V3. Both were announced by Facebook and Intel in [OCP virtual summit 2020].

Delta Lake server is a single socket Cooper Lake Scalable Processor (CPX-SP) server.

Yosemite-V3 has multiple configurations. Depending on configurations, it may
host up to 4 Delta Lake servers in one sled.

The Yosemite-V3 program is in PVT phase. Facebook, Intel and partners
jointly develop FSP/coreboot/LinuxBoot stack on Delta Lake as an alternative
solution. This development reached EVT exit equivalent status.

## Required blobs

This board currently requires:
- FSP blob: The blob (Intel Cooper Lake Scalable Processor Firmware Support Package)
  is not yet available to the public. It will be made public some time after the MP
  (Mass Production) of CPX-SP.
- Microcode: Available through github.com:otcshare/Intel-Generic-Microcode.git.
- ME binary: Ignition binary will be made public some time after the MP
  of CPX-SP.
- ACM binaries: only required for CBnT enablement.

## Payload
- LinuxBoot: This is necessary only if you use LinuxBoot as coreboot payload.
  U-root as initramfs, is used in the joint development. It can be built
  following [All about u-root].

## Flashing coreboot

To do in-band FW image update, use [flashrom]:
    flashrom -p internal:ich_spi_mode=hwseq -c "Opaque flash chip" --ifd \
			-i bios --noverify-all -w <path to coreboot image>

From OpenBMC, to update FW image:
    fw-util slotx --update bios <path to coreboot image>

To power off/on the host:
    power-util slotx off
    power-util slotx on

To connect to console through SOL (Serial Over Lan):
    sol-util slotx

## Firmware configurations
[ChromeOS VPD] is used to store most of the firmware configurations.
RO_VPD region holds default values, while RW_VPD region holds customized
values.

VPD variables supported are:
- firmware_version: This variable holds overall firmware version. coreboot
  uses that value to populate smbios type 1 version field.
- DeltaLake specific VPDs: check mb/ocp/deltalake/vpd.h.

## Working features
The solution is developed using LinuxBoot payload with Linux kernel 5.2.9, and [u-root]
as initramfs.
- SMBIOS:
    - Type 0 -- BIOS Information
    - Type 1 -- System Information
    - Type 2 -- Baseboard Information
    - Type 3 -- System Enclosure or Chassis
    - Type 4 -- Processor Information
    - Type 7 -- Cache Information
    - Type 8 -- Port Connector Information
    - Type 9 -- PCI Slot Information
    - Type 11 -- OEM String
    - Type 16 -- Physical Memory Array
    - Type 17 -- Memory Device
    - Type 19 -- Memory Array Mapped Address
    - Type 32 -- System Boot Information
    - Type 38 -- IPMI Device Information
    - Type 41 -- Onboard Devices Extended Information
    - Type 127 -- End-of-Table
- BMC integration:
    - BMC readiness check
    - IPMI commands
    - watchdog timer
    - POST complete pin acknowledgement
    - Check BMC version: ipmidump -device
- SEL record generation
- Converged Bootguard and TXT (CBnT)
    - TPM
    - Bootguard profile 0T
    - TXT
    - SRTM (verified through tboot)
    - memory secret clearance upon ungraceful shutdown
- Early serial output
- port 80h direct to GPIO
- ACPI tables: APIC/DMAR/DSDT/FACP/FACS/HPET/MCFG/SPMI/SRAT/SLIT/SSDT
- Skipping memory training upon subsequent reboots by using MRC cache
- BMC crash dump
- Error injection through ITP
- Versions
    - Check FSP version: cbmem | grep LB_TAG_PLATFORM_BLOB_VERSION
    - Check Microcode version: cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep microcode
- Devices:
    - Boot drive
    - NIC card
    - All 5 data drives
- Power button
- localboot
- netboot from IPv6
- basic memory hardware error injection/detection (SMI handler not upstreamed)
- basic PCIe hardware error injection/detection (SMI handler not upstreamed)

## Stress/performance tests passed
- OS warm reboot (1000 cycles)
- DC reboot (1000 cycles)
- AC reboot (1000 cycle)
- Mprime test (6 hours)
- StressAppTest (6 hours)
- Ptugen (6 hours)

## Performance tests on par with traditional firmware
- coremark
- SpecCPU
- Linkpack
- Iperf(IPv6)
- FIO

## Other tests passed
- Power
- Thermal

## Known issues
- MLC (Intel Memory Latency Check) and stream performance issue
- HECI access at OS run time:
    - spsInfoLinux64 command fail to return ME version
    - ptugen command fail to get memory power

## Feature gaps
- flashrom command not able to update ME region
- ACPI APEI tables
- PCIe hotplug, Virtual Pin Ports
- PCIe Live Error Recovery
- RO_VPD region as well as other RO regions are not write protected
- Not able to selectively enable/disable core

## Technology

```eval_rst
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Processor (1 socket)   | Intel Cooper Lake Scalable Processor        |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| BMC                    | Aspeed AST 2500                             |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| PCH                    | Intel Lewisburg C620 Series                 |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
```

[OCP]: https://www.opencompute.org
[OCP virtual summit 2020]: https://www.opencompute.org/summit/virtual-summit/schedule
[flashrom]: https://flashrom.org/Flashrom
[All about u-root]: https://github.com/linuxboot/book/tree/master/u-root
[u-root]: https://u-root.org/
[ChromeOS VPD]: https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/platform/vpd/+/master/README.md

Commit message:

doc/mb/ocp: Update DeltaLake for VPD variables used in LinuxBoot
u-root commits:
bmc_bootorder_override
https://github.com/u-root/u-root/pull/1902
systemboot_log_level:
https://github.com/u-root/u-root/pull/1922

Change-Id: I3da7291188ee06c50008aa3fc7142210215044d4
Signed-off-by: Johnny Lin <johnny_lin@wiwynn.com>
Reviewed-on: https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/50377
Tested-by: build bot (Jenkins) <no-reply@coreboot.org>
Reviewed-by: Marc Jones <marc@marcjonesconsulting.com>

Documentation/mainboard/ocp/deltalake.md, after:

# OCP Delta Lake

This page describes coreboot support status for the [OCP] (Open Compute Project)
Delta Lake server platform. This page is updated following each 4-weeks
build/test/release cycle.

## Introduction

OCP Delta Lake server platform is a component of multi-host server system
Yosemite-V3. Both were announced by Facebook and Intel in [OCP virtual summit 2020].

Delta Lake server is a single socket Cooper Lake Scalable Processor (CPX-SP) server.

Yosemite-V3 has multiple configurations. Depending on configurations, it may
host up to 4 Delta Lake servers in one sled.

The Yosemite-V3 program is in PVT phase. Facebook, Intel and partners
jointly develop FSP/coreboot/LinuxBoot stack on Delta Lake as an alternative
solution. This development reached EVT exit equivalent status.

## Required blobs

This board currently requires:
- FSP blob: The blob (Intel Cooper Lake Scalable Processor Firmware Support Package)
  is not yet available to the public. It will be made public some time after the MP
  (Mass Production) of CPX-SP.
- Microcode: Available through github.com:otcshare/Intel-Generic-Microcode.git.
- ME binary: Ignition binary will be made public some time after the MP
  of CPX-SP.
- ACM binaries: only required for CBnT enablement.

## Payload
- LinuxBoot: This is necessary only if you use LinuxBoot as coreboot payload.
  U-root as initramfs, is used in the joint development. It can be built
  following [All about u-root].

## Flashing coreboot

To do in-band FW image update, use [flashrom]:
    flashrom -p internal:ich_spi_mode=hwseq -c "Opaque flash chip" --ifd \
			-i bios --noverify-all -w <path to coreboot image>

From OpenBMC, to update FW image:
    fw-util slotx --update bios <path to coreboot image>

To power off/on the host:
    power-util slotx off
    power-util slotx on

To connect to console through SOL (Serial Over Lan):
    sol-util slotx

## Firmware configurations
[ChromeOS VPD] is used to store most of the firmware configurations.
RO_VPD region holds default values, while RW_VPD region holds customized
values.

VPD variables supported are:
- firmware_version: This variable holds overall firmware version. coreboot
  uses that value to populate smbios type 1 version field.
- bmc_bootorder_override: When it's set to 1 IPMI OEM command can override boot
  order. The boot order override is done in the u-root LinuxBoot payload.
- systemboot_log_level: u-root package systemboot log levels, would be mapped to
  quiet/verbose in systemboot as that is all we have for now. 5 to 8 would be mapped
  to verbose, 0 to 4 and 9 would be mapped to quiet.
- DeltaLake specific VPDs: check mb/ocp/deltalake/vpd.h.

## Working features
The solution is developed using LinuxBoot payload with Linux kernel 5.2.9, and [u-root]
as initramfs.
- SMBIOS:
    - Type 0 -- BIOS Information
    - Type 1 -- System Information
    - Type 2 -- Baseboard Information
    - Type 3 -- System Enclosure or Chassis
    - Type 4 -- Processor Information
    - Type 7 -- Cache Information
    - Type 8 -- Port Connector Information
    - Type 9 -- PCI Slot Information
    - Type 11 -- OEM String
    - Type 16 -- Physical Memory Array
    - Type 17 -- Memory Device
    - Type 19 -- Memory Array Mapped Address
    - Type 32 -- System Boot Information
    - Type 38 -- IPMI Device Information
    - Type 41 -- Onboard Devices Extended Information
    - Type 127 -- End-of-Table
- BMC integration:
    - BMC readiness check
    - IPMI commands
    - watchdog timer
    - POST complete pin acknowledgement
    - Check BMC version: ipmidump -device
- SEL record generation
- Converged Bootguard and TXT (CBnT)
    - TPM
    - Bootguard profile 0T
    - TXT
    - SRTM (verified through tboot)
    - memory secret clearance upon ungraceful shutdown
- Early serial output
- port 80h direct to GPIO
- ACPI tables: APIC/DMAR/DSDT/FACP/FACS/HPET/MCFG/SPMI/SRAT/SLIT/SSDT
- Skipping memory training upon subsequent reboots by using MRC cache
- BMC crash dump
- Error injection through ITP
- Versions
    - Check FSP version: cbmem | grep LB_TAG_PLATFORM_BLOB_VERSION
    - Check Microcode version: cat /proc/cpuinfo | grep microcode
- Devices:
    - Boot drive
    - NIC card
    - All 5 data drives
- Power button
- localboot
- netboot from IPv6
- basic memory hardware error injection/detection (SMI handler not upstreamed)
- basic PCIe hardware error injection/detection (SMI handler not upstreamed)

## Stress/performance tests passed
- OS warm reboot (1000 cycles)
- DC reboot (1000 cycles)
- AC reboot (1000 cycle)
- Mprime test (6 hours)
- StressAppTest (6 hours)
- Ptugen (6 hours)

## Performance tests on par with traditional firmware
- coremark
- SpecCPU
- Linkpack
- Iperf(IPv6)
- FIO

## Other tests passed
- Power
- Thermal

## Known issues
- MLC (Intel Memory Latency Check) and stream performance issue
- HECI access at OS run time:
    - spsInfoLinux64 command fail to return ME version
    - ptugen command fail to get memory power

## Feature gaps
- flashrom command not able to update ME region
- ACPI APEI tables
- PCIe hotplug, Virtual Pin Ports
- PCIe Live Error Recovery
- RO_VPD region as well as other RO regions are not write protected
- Not able to selectively enable/disable core

## Technology

```eval_rst
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Processor (1 socket)   | Intel Cooper Lake Scalable Processor        |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| BMC                    | Aspeed AST 2500                             |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| PCH                    | Intel Lewisburg C620 Series                 |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
```

[OCP]: https://www.opencompute.org
[OCP virtual summit 2020]: https://www.opencompute.org/summit/virtual-summit/schedule
[flashrom]: https://flashrom.org/Flashrom
[All about u-root]: https://github.com/linuxboot/book/tree/master/u-root
[u-root]: https://u-root.org/
[ChromeOS VPD]: https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/platform/vpd/+/master/README.md
